So at this point in the course you have come up with the idea.
You posted it online and now you're sifting through the masses of people that have responded to your
ad.
Hopefully you've posted it on oDesk Lance and freelancer.
That's it.
I suggest that's the best way of casting your net as wide as possible depending on how specific your
application is or how well you've described your application.
I would imagine you probably if you've waited about 24 hours have anywhere between 20 and 50 bids.
I think the bulk of them will probably come from freelancer because that is where the people follow
the quantity over quality credo Elance are gonna be a lot fewer.
But the quality they're going to be much higher.
Those are going to be the developers are probably got to put on your shortlist picking a freelancer
is crucial later in this course.
We're going to do this in real life in application.
If you're new to the course you probably won't see that because at the very beginning of the Course
I'm going to start off by taking ideas and then starting the process of recruiting developers to build
the idea.
So if you're too early.
Just be patient it'll come out in a week or so.
Right now we're just going to talk over in general how do you pick a good freelancer.
And this is a scale that I've developed over the last five years in the last hundred some applications.
I'm going to teach you how I do it how I rank my freelancers.
There could be other ways of doing it out there and I'm not saying those are wrong.
I'm saying this is what's worked for me.
I can walk you through my logic and my rationale for why I do it this way.
I rate them on five things.
Number one is relevancy.
Relevancy means that when you're looking at a freelancer look at their portfolio.
How many applications have they done that are similar to what you're building not only similar in subject
similar in industry and similar in size.
Does it three dimensions that I look at these so when my projects was a taxi management app.
Now I'm going to look for someone who one hopefully has worked in some kind of logistics application
Hopefully someone who's worked in cars or taxis or transportation sub that to look for someone who has
built any type of application that I think controls moving parts and controls actual employees if they
don't have that next Cobley a strike against them then I'm going to look for applications they've built
that have similar features.
My application text messaging.
It also had an online screen or they can pick their shifts and pick their hours.
It also had a system where they could communicate the root text message and that text message system
was essentially like a robot that would talk back to them.
That's a little obscure.
So I'm going to look for but I'm going to look for somebody who's maybe built text message apps before
really anything along those lines.
I might look for someone who's done online scheduling that could be something if they have neither one
of those then.
It's probably a strike in my book as well for the term relevancy.
The last sub dimension under relevancy is going to be scope.
Look at the application they've built.
If you're proposing to build an application that you think will take a month to build.
See how many other applications they've built that also took them roughly a month.
Most of the freelancing applications will show you how long their projects lasted.
ODesk will tell you how many hours they build on a particular project.
Elance I believe you can just go and look at the job posting freelancer is similar in that regard.
So if you're looking for a big project look to see that they have big project experience of you doing
a smaller project then maybe you want to make sure that they can pull off a quick job as well.
They're not going to disappear because the application that they signed on to build is only going to
take them a week.
If you have the case where they have either all small project experience or all big project experience
I always err in favor of big project experience.
I never really hold that against them and that's the only thing they do.
That just means that they like larger projects.
But in my experience developers who work on larger applications have a larger breadth of skill and also
they're just more responsible in general.
So that's not necessarily a knock against them if they only have short projects.
That means that they could be a less mature freelancer.
That could mean that they're not nearly as committed.
That can mean that they have other commitments that can actually get in the way.
The second criteria I use is experience.
This is probably the most obvious one and I think that honestly when you look at a freelancer and you
want to determine how you rate them on experience just click on their profile and just take a quick
gander.
It shouldn't take you more than a couple of minutes to get a general idea of how experienced they are
the way that you do this is you just simply look at the freelancer see how many projects they have specifically
how long they've been doing this.
That's another big one.
They've only been on the application for a year or maybe six months that could be a red flag.
If it's the case that they've only been using that platform for a short period of time you can always
ask them once you get to your shortlist.
Say how long have you been making web applications and they will tell you often within their resumes
or their profile descriptions it'll say I've been a developer four and a half years.
Use that as a general gauge of how mature they are and how comfortable you are with them.
The biggest thing is what's going to happen when they run into a problem.
People who are more experienced are less likely to run away and they're less likely to have an incomplete
project more experience is better.
But keep in mind obviously that if you're trying to cut costs you might have to forego a little bit
of experience.
Also look at your application and have a deep think about how complicated this really is.
You can reach out to the freelancers and ask them how complicated is this and they will generally give
you a good idea.
And that's a good way of engaging.
OK this is a medium difficulty project or this is a low difficulty project if that's the case then experience
is not nearly as important of a criteria.
Criteria number three.
And this is the biggest one for me.
It is interest every time you've heard someone who has a hiring or H.R. guru They always tell you is
really really important about hiring someone.
They always tell you that that person needs to show interest in your company and that is kind of a startup
motto as well that people who are interested but lack the skills can learn the skills that people with
the skills who lack the interest are just going to be kind of dead in the water.
I believe that works for freelancers as well.
And in this case look for interest.
How do you tell if they're interested.
Typically you'll see a range of responses to your project that range could be on one end of the spectrum
which is that they sent you a copy and pasted message.
And in that copy and pasted message you could notice that nothing has been modified.
How do you tell if something is modified in their copy paste message.
The way I tell is if I post a project with specifics to it say I posted my Twilio taxi application.
Do they mention anything about Twilio in their application.
That's generally a dead giveaway for me.
Did they mention any of the skills that I listed as prerequisites or desired skills on my job posting.
There's no mention wow they didn't even read it at all.
Now the other end of the spectrum in terms of interest will be that someone will just send you a message
and they're commenting directly to you about the project.
Maybe they're responding with a question that is definitely a better sign a better sign is them saying
I like this project I'm interested in this project or a way that they're illustrating that they've thought
about your project.
They're spending time on your bed and they are showing that when they read your bed they're thinking
about it.
That's a good way of just of telling how interested and how committed they are to it.
There are freelancers who are good at hiding that what they do is they have templates that they can
modify very quickly and it's very hard for you to tell whether or not it's been written by hand or it's
just a copy and paste message.
The way that you can easily get through this is just by messaging them and I'll show you this and we
actually go through and do this for real.
What you can do is just message them really quickly send them a sentence saying what do you think about
the project.
How long do you think it'll take now.
What that will do is a lot of people who don't even check their accounts.
They just won't respond.
So there you go.
You save yourself some time.
Some people respond to give an inadequate answer and some people will respond and blow you away.
They'll say you know I think these are the hard parts about it here are the easy parts about it.
This is my best guess of time.
And then they'll ask you questions.
That means that the person's engaged and that is generally a positive sign.
Another positive sign is when they verbally say they're interested in it or they mention that they built
something in the past.
Those are always good interest will keep their focus on the application and interest will make it such
that they're more willing to put an extra work and they're less willing to charge you for that extra
work because it just comes naturally to them.
If this is drudge work for them you're probably going to run into more issues than if it's someone who's
really committed the fourth criteria that I use is availability availability is pretty easy to tell.
You just simply ask them if you don't trust their responses.
What you can do is you can look at their profiles.
Most of these freelancing Web sites they will tell you what other projects they are working on.
A lot of times it's hard when a studio responds It's like a firm or an agency responds.
You know that they have other projects and you know that they're not going to be realistic when you
ask them hey what's your bandwidth going forward.
How many people can you devote to this project.
They always lie or they always exaggerate because they don't want to lose the sale.
And they always overestimate their ability to shift resources around.
That is something I've known just from being in the studio game for so long that is inevitable and the
best people do it regardless.
Have a look for yourself look at their profile see how many active projects there are.
You can tell that some are active and some of them look like they're abandoned.
That's a red flag.
It looks like there's a small project that started six months ago and it's not wrapped up.
It's not necessarily their fault but it's something that you should keep in mind if you're not looking
at an agency or a studio.
Again IRA go back to what I said originally which is that you can just ask them what's your availability
like.
And for the most part they will be honest.
If it's the case of a freelancer I think that your tolerance for how many other projects they have should
be lower.
I say this because say of a freelancer he might think he's extremely productive and they might be extremely
doctor if he or she.
However there are certain things they cannot predict.
They don't know when a bug might hit one of their projects.
They don't know when the scope of a project changes or when someone that they're working with changes
the specifications for the project or if someone disappears.
Things happen.
So what can happen is if they're if they're billing your application and they're building three other
things it is likely that one of the other projects can balloon and every well in tensioning developer
I've met still makes this mistake.
They always think that they can quantify how long and how much how much time they're going to spend
on their other projects.
And that always changes.
It is too variable.
Now if the freelancer says they have other job and we talked about this previously about how finding
off hours freelancers is fantastic.
If they didn't have another job that I think is an exception.
Why do I say that.
Because their job is typically nine to five if they've been with that job for a long period of time.
They're more realistic about how often they have to have overtime.
How often do their projects at work balloon.
If it's one job that's one job it's not.
Two other projects that they have limited familiarity with.
So if they have another job that seems fine.
Typically I look for people that have a lot of availability.
There's one other thing that I think you should keep in mind if they have a wide open schedule that's
a good thing.
And it's a bad thing.
They have a wide open schedule.
Ask them are you going to be taking on other projects while you do this.
That's a crucial thing that you should ask them criteria.
Number five is responsiveness.
A lot of people think that I read too much into responsiveness and I think I read too little into it.
I think this is huge.
When I message them how fast do they respond when I message them and I ask them two questions.
They respond to both questions or do they only respond to one or are they even more Spohn to one and
it's not the correct response responsiveness for me is huge.
Because the more I ping them and the more they respond in a shorter period of time that shows me that
they're active shows me that they're engage it shows me that they're interested.
Remember previously on the oDesk lecture it shows you how often they respond to their contacts.
That's a great sign.
Now someone who only responds sometimes or they get around to it every 48 hours is not someone that
you want to go into a project with because what happens when your servers crash and you have to message
them.
How responsive are they.
You should try to talk to them outside of these systems.
See if they have Skype they have Skype then you can talk to them directly and with minimal back and
forth time.
I'll talk about that in a little bit more in the next lecture.
Why not having Skype is actually a really bad thing.
Look for responsiveness.
How do you know if there are spots of really simple.
I call it the ping test.
What I do is I will message them a quick question see how fast they respond how is fast within an hour
superfast.
Within two hours that's quite fast.
Are they in another country.
Well if they're not in the country take what I just said and multiply it quite a bit.
I think if they respond within five or six hours considering this is a freelancer Web site and you're
not necessarily a client yet and then you have time zones you can take that into consideration if they're
in your country and they're not responding within a couple hours.
I don't generally like that.
This is also depends on how many people we have bidding on your project and how choosy you want to be.
Personally I do not like people who do not respond and ask them questions and I don't like people who
take a day to respond.
That makes me anxious.
If you want to go a little bit hardcore about it like me I send them a ping message at midnight.
See how they respond.
I'll send them something kind of at the range of when they should be awake when they should be asleep.
I just want to see how connected they are to their phone.
For me this is huge.
Someone who's interested in my project who has a decent amount of experience who is very responsive
is a very good candidate for me.
I think that when we go ahead and do a real live version of this you guys will get a lot more out of
it.
If you have questions at this point in the lecture feel free to post it in the group discussion and
we can talk about it.
There are other criteria I'm leaving out and I admit that these are the five that I care about and they're
not really in any order.
I think that you kind of rate them on all five.
And I think what I'll do is probably attach a tech sheet that you can actually use some kind of visualization
that will help you rate them in your head.
After a while you'll get really good at this and you'll be able to rattle it off very quickly after
a while you also kind of get a gut feeling for.
Is this a good applicant or is this about to print in the next lecture.
I'm going to talk about the five things I've recognized that are red flags that you probably didn't
realize were red flags.